>>WILLIAM HENRY:
Mary Magdalene was
the supreme initiate of Jesus.
Was she also one of
the most mysterious
of all masters of arcanum?
>>CLARE HENRY: Next on
"Arcanum," The Lost Secrets
of the Ascension
of Mary Magdalene.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WILLIAM: Said to
be a prophetess who
knew the all, a priestess
of Isis and Ishtar,
a holy harlot who seduced
men from the Eastern
and Western world, including
a messiah, a mother
of future kings, and a
perfumer, Mary Magdalene
is as alluring as the
mare among stallions
the Egyptians' enemies
set loose in war
to drive the pharaoh's
stallions wild.
>>CLARE: The source of
her power to captivate
is her refusal to
be put in a box,
whether it be an alabaster
box, a prostitute
box, a Christian box,
or a goddess box.
So in this episode,
we will search
for Mary Magdalene
outside the box.
>>WILLIAM: Even
more, this episode
is a search for the lost
esoteric teaching of Jesus
and Mary Magdalene, the
arcanum, which she taught,
and for which the popular
13th century French chronicler
Jacobus said she earned
the distinction Illuminata
and Illuminatrix, the
illumined and illuminator.
>>CLARE: As the Illuminator,
the Enlightened, Jacobus upholds
Magdalene as illumined with
the light of perfect knowledge
in her mind and illumined with
the light of glory in her body.
In this case, glory describes
the splendor and bliss
of heaven.
>>WILLIAM: Glorify
means apotheosized,
to raise up, to make
one a god or goddess.
It also literally means to
illuminate, to give light,
or to glow rays.
Is Jacobus saying
that Mary Magdalene
was an ascended light being?
Or that she knew the secrets
of the rainbow body of light?
>>CLARE: All the occult
mysteries of arcanum
speak of a key that is required
to unlock mystical secrets
of enlightenment and
the body of light.
>>WILLIAM: The lost secret
of the arcanum this episode
illuminates is about
building the light body
through the release
of secretions
from the astounding
manufacturing
plant of spiritual
oils, the human brain.
>>CLARE: The oil, or
essence, was the key secret
of Mary Magdalene, and
is the key to arcanum.
In William's
feature presentation
he will introduce us to be
ascension mysteries connected
to Mary Magdalene.
>>WILLIAM: Mary Magdalene was
recognized by early church
fathers as the apostle
to the apostles,
since according to
church narratives,
she was the one who stood in
the presence of the risen Jesus
and went to tell
the other disciples
the news of the resurrection.
The Gospel of Mary
says Mary Magdalene was
given a special transmission
of knowledge, or gnosis.
This transmission came
after Jesus' resurrection
and concerned the
nature of matter,
of salvation, and of the
soul's journey through darkness
of the astral planes to
reach the realm, kingdom,
or empire of light.
A tantalizing reference to the
nature of Jesus' true teaching
is provided in
the Pistis Sophia.
Jesus tells Mary, "Do not
see seeking day or night.
And do not let yourselves
relax until you
have found all the mysteries
of the Kingdom of Light, which
will purify you and make
you into pure light,
and lead you into the
Kingdom of Light."
According to Jewish
legend, to make sure
of the identity of
the Messiah, the Jews
will demand that he perform
the miracle of resurrection
before their eyes,
reviving such of the dead
as they had known personally.
Instead, the Messiah will
do seven wonders, including
showing the three holy
vessels of the temple,
the Ark of the Covenant,
the Flask of Manna,
and the Cruze of Sacred
Oil, all three of which
disappeared mysteriously.
Also, the Messiah will wave the
scepter given to him by God.
All of these tools are
mentioned as forming
the components of the
Ark of the Covenant.
In the Bible, the
story of the Holy Oil
begins with Moses
at Mount Sinai,
after he had received
the Ten Commandments.
He went up Mount Sinai
again, and this time he
waited for six days
before entering
the cloud of the
Lord's presence.
Moses received
detailed instructions
for making the sacred
oil, but ultimately it
was kept in the Holy of
Holies of Solomon's Temple.
This oil went missing, along
with the Ark of the Covenant
kit of tools, in around 586
BC when the Temple of Solomon
was destroyed.
Jews believe these
items would be recovered
at the time of the
Messiah, The Anointed One,
and would be reassembled.
When fully assembled,
the three holy vessels
of the temple-- the
Ark, the Flask of Manna,
and the Cruze of
Sacred Oil-- form
a kit of tools known
as the Hetoimasia,
or Throne of Christ,
as seen here.
This is the ascension
kit and the throne
of the Second Coming.
Jewish tradition says Jesus'
brother, James the Righteous,
was responsible for recovering
and assembling these tools,
all save for one, the
Jar of Anointing Oil.
This was saved for
Mary Magdalene.
Jewish Gnostics, who
recorded their beliefs
in the Gospel of Philip,
say the Magdalene Sacred
Oil is called Chrism, and that
it produces the resurrection.
And it says the Chrism
is superior to baptism,
for it is from the word Chrism
that we have been called
Christians, certainly not
from the word baptism.
And it is because of the Chrism
that the Christ has his name.
This oil opened
one's spiritual eyes,
but it may have done more.
Isiah said the
Anointed One received
the Holy Spirit,
symbolized by a dove.
In Gustave Moreau's painting,
we see Mary Magdalene
cradling Jesus, perhaps in
the moment after she anointed
his body with the sacred oil.
A version of Enoch's
metamorphosis,
given in The Book of
the Secrets of Enoch,
explicitly describes the
transformation of Enoch as one
which blurs the boundaries
between human and angelic
experience, and indicates
he achieved the rainbow
body of light from
this sacred oil.
And the Lord said to Michael,
"Take Enoch and strip him
of this Earthly garments, and
anoint him with the holy oil,
and clothe him in
garments of glory.
And Michael stripped
Enoch of his garments
and anointed him with this oil.
And he looked upon
himself and saw
that he was one of the
Glorious Ones, or Perfect Ones,
and there was no
difference, and all
his fear and
trembling left him."
Second Enoch portrays
the archangel Michael
extracting Enoch
from his clothes
and anointing him with an oil.
And the anointing
with shining oil
causes Enoch's transformation
from a mortal human
to the luminous garment of an
immortal angelic being, one
of the Glorious Ones.
This is what happened
to Jesus as well.
This is the purpose of the
Chrism, or anointing oil,
in Mary Madeleine's
alabaster jar.
And this is what we see
featured in depictions
of Mary Magdalene, including
this notable version by Roger
van der Weyden.
In another example,
this one by Correggio,
which is very gentle,
we see Mary Magdalene
reading with her jar beside her.
John Hey shows her with a
jewel radiating on her crown,
radiating light.
In Bernardino Luini's
version of it,
we see a black mirror on Mary
Madeleine's heart chakra.
All of these images
are reminiscent
of the ancient goddess Ishtar,
or Mari, holding a water
vase from 2,300 BC.
Some believe the Magdalene was
a priestess of Ishtar, or Mari,
and might have learned the
secrets of the alabaster jar
from her.
The crucifixion took
place at Golgotha,
the place of the skull.
In this example by
an unknown artist,
we see a mysterious face
on Mary Magdalene's jar.
This is one reason why the skull
is present at crucifixion art.
But there is another,
deeper reason.
Georges La Tour's
"Penitent Magdalene"
depicts her in a dramatic
moment of contemplation.
It is loaded with
arcanum symbolism.
The Metropolitan
Museum of Art Guidebook
says the elaborate silver
mirror symbolizes luxury,
while the self-consuming
candle reflected
in it suggests the
frailty of human life.
The skull upon which
her clasped hands rest
may stand for peaceful
acceptance of death.
However, in religious
symbolism, the candlestick
is the symbol of
spiritual illumination,
of the light, and of the
seed of life and salvation.
In Christian symbolism, it
is the divine light shining
into the world, and Christ
as the light of the world.
These suggest Jesus' words,
"I am the light of the world."
De La Tour's "Magdalene
with the Smoking Flame"
once again emphasizes
Mary Magdalene
in a meditative state.
The skull on her
lap is interesting.
It's a protective box
for the brain, eyes,
and hearing organs.
It is the cup of
life, the grail that
catches the secretions
from the brain.
Without the key
vibrating in our brains
and radiating
throughout our bodies,
no one can gain the higher
knowledge of the gods.
The polished skull and
leather books are repeated,
but the emphasis
is on the candle.
The LA County
Museum of Art Guide
says it emits the light
that the followers of Saint
John of the Cross called
The Living Flame of Love,
towards which the spiritual
pilgrims are drawn out
of the dark night of the soul.
Magdalene anointed, or is it
embalmed, Jesus in the tomb
after the crucifixion.
Mark 16:1 reads, "When
the Sabbath was over,
Mary Magdalene and Mary, the
mother of James and Solome,
bought spices so that they
might come and anoint him."
Very early on, the first day of
the week, they came to the tomb
when the sun had risen.
In Roger van der
Weyden's "Pieta,"
Mary Magdalene kneels in
veneration at Christ's feet.
Alongside her, an ointment
pot, her customary
attribute containing the Chrism.
The skull in the
foreground symbolizes
the location, Golgotha,
literally the place
of the skull.
In John and Hubert
Van Eyck's rendering,
we see the Angel of the
Lord, a watcher on the tomb.
Three women stand
by the empty grave,
and the angel tells
them what has happened.
Christ has risen from the grave,
the guards are sound asleep,
and the women carry bottles
with ointment and spices
to tend to the body of Christ.
In the background is
the city of Jerusalem.
Luke identifies the women
as Mary Magdalene, Joanna,
and Mary, mother of James, and
adds two men standing by them
in shining garments.
In Fra Angelico's
"Resurrection of Christ
and the Women at the Tomb,"
we see the three Marys
at the empty tomb.
If Mary Magdalene anointed
Jesus with the resurrection oil,
as we're told, his
translation into a light being
would not have been a surprise,
as the Bible proposes.
It would have been the expected
outcome of this ceremony.
The Chrism would have dissolved
his body into glorious light,
a transformation beautifully
visualize by William Blake.
Contemplate this moment
as Blake shows us the
risen Jesus as a light
being, perhaps being
transformed by the Chrism oil.
This event is even
more spectacularly
shown by William
Holman Hunt, who
shows the rainbow body around
Jesus' resurrected body.
Andrea Mantegna's
astounding painting
shows a radiant Christ
stepping out of his grave,
surrounded by angels.
In his left hand he holds
the flag of the Crusaders.
Around his body we see
the radiant angels,
producing an illuminating
fire around his body.
And once again,
the radiant Christ
emerges from the cave
as a victorious being.
The same thing is shown in this
Coptic Egyptian version, where
Jesus rises from the
grave, or the tomb,
as a radiant light being.
The motif of anointing
with oil looms
large in ancient Judeo-Christian
tradition, especially the lore
of Adam and Eve.
In a Gnostic tale, Adam is
in great pain, near death.
He sends Seth to
the Garden of Eden
to fetch the oil from
the Tree of Life.
Unfortunately, the
archangel Michael
refuses to give him
the oil, telling Seth
that the oil will be
used in the end times
for those who will be worthy
of entering the Garden.
The oil will be used to
transform, or to assist,
in the transition
of the righteous
into celestial beings.
The oil will be used
in the end times
for those who will be worthy of
entering the garden, or Scion.
And in the story,
we're told, it is
likely to rays of
the glittering sun.
This returns us to the
subject of Pentecost,
discussed in the "Akhenaten
and the Holy Light" episode.
At Pentecost, the
disciples gathered
in the upper room,
the brain, where
they were anointed by the divine
fire frequency, or vibration,
of the Holy Spirit.
In the images of Pentecost,
the ascended Jesus
transmits the Holy
Spirit to the disciples
from the cosmic realms.
He sprays gleaming
rays of light.
This is strikingly similar
to the anointing of the Aton
by Akhenaten.
Is this a coincidence?
Or, does it uphold the
connection between the Essenes
and the religion of the disk,
as we explored in that episode.
Does this art
portray the Essenes
in the arms, or hands,
of the holy light?
Nefertiti offers an
alabaster jar to the Aton.
Is this the same alabaster
jar of Mary Magdalene,
which contains the Chrism,
the resurrection oil?
A provocative theory concerning
Mary Madeleine's anointing
of Jesus claimed
she was performing
an ancient Egyptian ceremony
of anointing kingly candidates
in order to enhance
their physical powers
and protect them from
danger and increase
their connection to God.
Was this the ceremony
that Mary Magdalene
performed in the tomb of Jesus?
And is it possible
that Mary Magdalene
learned the secrets
of the Aton and how
to become one with the sun?
According to legend, after
Christ's resurrection
from the tomb, Mary Magdalene
moved to Southern France
where she lived in a cave
as a hermit, at Saint Baume,
near Aix-en-Provence.
There, she was transported
seven times a day
by angels into the
presence of God,
where she heard,
with her bodily ears,
the delightful harmonies
of the celestial choirs.
This unusual, nude
figure in the Louvre
represents Mary Magdalene
as a mystic ascetic.
And according to legend, when
the repentant Magdalene lived
in the cave, she was
clothed only by her hair.
Every day she was
raised up in the sky
by angels to hear
the heavenly chorus.
This statue appeared on
the German art market
in the 19th century, and
was purchased by the Louvre
in 1902.
We see the same long hair
motif in these scenes, where
Mary Magdalene is
ascending to Heaven
in the company of angels.
The angels actually form a
twirling whirlwind, or Merkaba,
around her hair covered body.
And as they lift her
into the heavens,
she is ascending into the
heavens as a transformed being.
Perhaps the most
striking example
of the Magdalene
covered with hair
is found in Botticelli's "The
Trinity With Saints" altarpiece
from 1491.
This painting is part of
an altarpiece commissioned
for a convent for
repentant prostitutes,
called Saint Isabelletta
Del Converte, in Florence.
Today, it's in London's
Courtauld Gallery.
In the center is a vision
of the Trinity, God
the Father, a dove
symbolizing the Holy Spirit,
and Christ on the Cross.
Flanking this
surprising apparition
are John the Baptist,
patron Saint of Florence,
and Mary Magdalene,
patroness of the convent.
Mary is clothed by her
hair, and John wears fur,
recalling the time both saints
spent in the wilderness,
says the Courtauld
Gallery website.
Could the hair and
fur actually be
a reference to something else?
Maybe even and ascension suit?
Artists depict Mary ascending
into the divine presence
with long hair, and through
multi-colored clouds
accompanied by angels.
The cloud is, of
course, a reference
to the Merkaba throne.
In this example, by
Giattao, the angels
lift Mary Magdalene to Heaven
on the multi-colored Merkaba
throne chariot
that is strikingly
similar to the
winged ring of Jesus.
Taddeo Crivelli
shows the Magdalene
with her hair covered
body, once again,
and standing on a whirling
vortex composed of angels.
So here she is ascending
into the heavens
on this whirling vortex
of angelic energy.
In the early 1500s,
German artists
produced a series of depictions
of the ecstasy, or ascension
of Mary Magdalene,
covered with hair.
Other versions show her
covered with feathers
that resemble fur.
It is believed that
this practice arose
from medieval liturgical
dramas and mystery
plays, in which the
actors portraying angels
wore garments covered
with feathers to emphasize
their power of flight.
Here, the angels lift Mary
Magdalene in a twirling vortex.
It's safe to say this flight is
not to a physical destination,
rather it is to a
metaphysical one.
But what is the meaning of
this strange looking fur?
In my view, interesting
insight into this question
comes from the Egyptian
images of Ptah,
the god of smithcraft
and arcanum, who is also
shown with his body
covered with feathers,
or wearing a feather
suit of many colors.
Osiris, the Egyptian
god of resurrection,
also wears one of
these feather suits.
Ptah's ascension suit and
Osiris' is strikingly similar
in appearance, and
possibly function,
to the rainbow body of light.
Could there in fact
be a deep connection
between Mary Magdalene's suit,
the feathered ascension suit
of Ptah and Osiris,
and the rainbow body?
Inspiration for these
paintings, titled
"The Ecstasy of Mary
Magdalene," come
from to Jacobus de
Voragine's book of saints,
entitled The Golden Legend, in
which it's written, "the saint,
desiring to contemplate
celestial things,
withdrew into a
mountain cave, which
had been prepared by
the angels' hands.
And there she remained for 30
years, unknown to everyone.
Every day, the angels lifted her
into the skies, and for an hour
she heard the celestial
music, after which,
replete with this
delicious meal,
she re-descended into her
cave and had not the slightest
need for bodily ailments."
The Oxford English Dictionary
records extasis transforming
in meaning in late Greek,
becoming "withdrawal
of the soul from the body,
mystic, or prophetic trance."
Particularly among
medical writers,
ecstasy was used
interchangeably with trance.
The art historian
Bedoyan points out
that ecstasy, which
transfigures Mary Magdalene,
is surprisingly reminiscent
of the detailed descriptions
of the ecstasy of the Spanish
Saint Theresa of Avila.
Caravaggio's painting
of Magdalene in ecstasy
was immensely influential for
future treatment of the theme
by artists, such as
Rubens and Simon Vouet.
She is in full bliss, connected
to the Heavenly realms.
The setting for Peter
Paul Rubens' painting
of Magdalene's ecstasy
is a rocky mountain
ledge at the mouth of a cave.
Rubens conveys a deep
mysticism in this painting.
Note the empty jar
beside Mary Magdalene.
Is this the source
of her ecstasy?
Could this be the Chrism?
Look at the expression
on Mary Madeleine's face.
Her eyes are slightly open
but appear somewhat lifeless.
Her face and upper
body have been lit up
by a shaft of light,
and she appears
to be in a trance-like state.
"To love God with
all your soul,"
wrote Paramahansa
Yogananda, "means
to enter the state of
super conscious ecstasy,
direct perception of the soul,
and its oneness with God."
It is the realization of the
soul as the reflection of God,
the soul's connection with
the consciousness of God.
"To love God with all the soul
requires the complete stillness
of transcendent
interiorization," he wrote.
Finally, from Assisi,
Italy, we see Mary Magdalene
receiving her cloak of light
from the alchemists Zosimus.
Her ascension is complete.
In Clare's Beyond
the Veil segment,
she will show us the further
connection between Mary
Magdalene and the ascension
and Merkaba mysteries.
>>CLARE: According to second
century Gnostic Christian
belief, recorded in
the Gospel of Mary,
and recovered in
the 20th century,
Mary Magdalene received a
special revelation, perhaps
a blessed flash of
illumination from Jesus
that was hidden from
the other apostles.
Jane Schaberg, professor of
Religious Studies and Women's
Studies at the University
of Detroit Mercy,
provides one of the most
interesting insights
into Mary Magdalene in her
book, The Resurrection of Mary
Magdalene.
She notes that
Migdal, or Magdala,
has a very high place in
women's mystical and literary
traditions for its connection
to the daughters of Job,
who died there.
The story of Job's
daughters reveals
ancient Magdala had an
otherworldly connection.
In fact, as a
literary reference,
Magdala may have meant something
like Wonderland or Oz means
today.
Specifically,
Magdala was involved
with Merkaba, or throne
chariot mysticism.
This Jewish mysticism focuses
on the transformation of humans
during a journey to the
throne chariot of God.
This tradition is
recorded in the testament
of Job, a first century
Gnostic document.
This story is
utterly fascinating.
In the opening of
the testament of Job,
the patriarch is feeling ill.
Perceiving that his
stewardship was nearly over,
Job gathered his daughters.
In all the land, there
were no women so beautiful
as Job's daughters,
says the Book of Job.
He called his first
daughter and said to her,
"Take this signet ring,
go to the chamber,
and bring me the
three golden boxes,
so that I may give
you an inheritance."
And she went away and
brought them to him.
He opened them and bought
forth three bands shimmering,
so that no man could describe
their form since they
are not from Earth,
but from heaven,
flashing with bright sparks
like rays of the sun.
One of Job's daughters
complains that "this
isn't much by way
of inheritance.
We won't be able to sustain
our life from them, will we?"
she asks.
And Job replied to them, "Not
only will you sustain life
from these, but
these bands will also
lead you into the better
world to live in the heavens."
In fact, according to Job,
the Lord gave him these cords.
When Day put on the cord,
she went out of her body,
put on a new heart, and never
again cared for Earthly things.
Then she sang angelic hymns
in the language of the angels.
Her sister's heart
was also transformed
the moment she put on the sash.
She, too, no longer
wished for worldly things.
And when she opened
her mouth, she suddenly
spoke the language of
the rulers, or Archons.
Taking a moment to familiarize
ourselves with the Archons
will be invaluable
in helping us to go
beyond the veil of this
story, and to reveal
the knowledge possessed
by these women of wisdom.
Some believe they are the same
as the ancient alien beings,
known as Malachim,
in ancient Iraq.
The hypostasis of the Archons
says the evil Archons clothed
man in a material body,
a casket, or tomb.
The Archons contrived
to keep Adam and Eve,
along with their divine
particles, trapped in matter,
enslaved forever in the
wheel of reincarnation,
as tillers of the
Garden of Eden.
In this way, humans
served the Archons.
The hypostasis also
describes a veil
that exists between the world
above and the realms below.
In the first
Apocalypse of James,
Jesus says the Archons are
like toll collectors who
seek to take, by theft,
our divine spark.
"They are not entirely
alien," say the Gnostics,
First Apocalypse of James,
"they are from Achamoth.
And these she produced as
she brought down the race
from the Pre-existant One."
This spirit was known as the
divine particle, or divine
embryo.
As the Gospel of Judas
tells us, the Savior
was considered a
divine particle that
was clothed in
the body of Jesus.
According to the
Gospel of Judas,
the Savior is the divine
spark, the spiritual being
inside Jesus, who lives
in a spiritual dimension.
The physical being of
Jesus is a simple covering,
much like a clothing
that the spiritual Savior
wears in the world.
The language of
the angels is also
called the language
of the birds,
likely because the
Latin "ave," or bird,
is phonetically
the same as "ave,"
angel; "ave," apple, the
symbol forbidden knowledge;
and "ova," meaning life.
The alchemist Falconelli calls
it the language of the gods.
He claims it was knowledge
of this language which Jesus
revealed to his
apostles by sending them
his spirit, the Holy Ghost.
One wonders if it is
even remotely possible
that Mary Magdalene
knew this language.
As documented by
the Gnostic gospels,
she certainly behaved
as a woman from Migdal.
That is, she knew how
to evade the Archons
and go beyond the veil.
In addition to speaking the
language of the Archons,
Job's second
daughter sang hymns.
When she sang her hymns, the
testament of Job tells us,
they were loaded with
insight into the workings
of the heavens.
The same singing and speaking
the language of the angels
happened when Job's
third daughter, Amalthea,
put on the sash.
Not only could Job's
daughters speak the language
of angels, what is more,
they could see and celebrate
the whirlwind, our
heavenly chariot, that
came for the soul of Job.
This is the Merkaba ascension
throne of Jewish mysticism.
Is the book of Job,
and the testament
of Job's account of these three
women of Magdala, a true story?
Or is it a lesson
meant to implant
the idea of the language
of the angels at Magdala,
and to connect Mary
Magdalene to it?
Was Magdala a prototype
for Wonderland or Oz?
These three sashes, or
cords, and their oddities
catch our attention
as they remind us
of the three rays of
the transfiguration.
As we noted, the Egyptian
three-rayed symbol
morphed into all of these
three-rayed symbols, which
represent initiation
or instruction.
For example, the trip-dot
symbol of the Chintamani
appears on Jesus'
robe and on the book
he is holding in the 6th
century icon from Mount Sinai.
More directly, the
Knights Templar
wore threefold cords,
or sashes, around waist
that connected them to a
strange idol, a head, which
among other charges, lead
to their persecution.
This idol was said to have
assured their resurrection.
The idol was the
Shroud of Turin,
suggesting a direct connection
between the three chords
and this three secrets
of resurrection.
Is there a three-pronged
sash, or a cord,
that connects us
to divine powers?
Is this umbilical
cord a musical chord?
Speaking of threes, the three
Marys of the New Testament
are similar to Job's three
daughters and the three
golden boxes.
Could Job's daughters
and the Marys
be titles for women who knew
the secrets of ascension?
It certainly appears possible.
Further, at the time of
Jesus, Mary Magdalene
was the primary priestess
with this wisdom.
Some propose that
Mary is a title.
Does it signify a woman
who has attained knowledge
of the secrets of resurrection?
Is this why a Mary has
such a pivotal role
in the resurrection of Jesus?
Let us view the assumption
of Mary through this lens.
Again, we are connecting
the three daughters of Job
with the three Marys present at
the crucifixion and entombment
of Jesus.
These are assumed to be
Mary, mother of Jesus;
Mary Magdalene; and
Mary of Bethany.
The Eastern Orthodox
church teaches us
that in addition to
Jesus, three other persons
were taken bodily into Heaven.
They were Enoch, Elijah
or Elias, and Mary.
The Catholic Feast
of the Assumption
is celebrated on
August the 15th,
and the Eastern Orthodox
and Eastern Catholics
celebrate the Theotokos, the
falling asleep of the mother
of Jesus, on that same date.
Eastern Orthodox
Christians believe
that Mary died a natural death,
that her soul was received
by Christ upon death, and
that her body was resurrected
on the third day
after her death,
and that she was taken
up into Heaven bodily
in anticipation of the
general resurrection.
Dramatic icons reveal
this wondrous scene.
In this northern Greek
icon from the 16th century,
Christ manifests in an
almond-shaped gateway,
a mandola, filled
with holy blue light.
A seraphim hovers above
the gateway protectively.
The resurrected
Christ carries Mary
through the portal, or gateway.
In the death and
assumption of the Virgin,
from a church in Macedonia,
we see Jesus emerging
from a blue portal to
take the soul of Mary.
Mary ascends in an orb of light,
riding upon an arch of light.
An open gate to Heaven
is above or behind her.
As she ascends, she transmits
her Holy belt to Thomas.
According to the
passing of Mary,
a text attributed to
Joseph of Aramathea,
Thomas was the only witness
of the assumption of Mary
into Heaven.
The other apostles were
miraculously transported
to Jerusalem to
witness her death.
Thomas was left in India,
but after her first burial,
he was transported
to her tomb where
he witnessed her bodily
assumption into Heaven,
from which she
dropped her girdle.
Thomas is most famous,
apart from his mission
to India, for the
doubting Thomas episode,
John 20, verse 24
to 29, where he
missed the post-resurrection
appearance of Jesus
to the 10 other apostles,
and said he would not
believe Jesus had returned
until he had felt his wounds.
In the story of the girdle
at the assumption of Mary,
where the other
apostles were present,
Thomas once again missed the
occasion, being on his way
back from India.
So the Virgin Mary, aware
of Thomas' skeptical nature,
appeared to him individually
and dropped, or transmitted,
the girdle she was wearing down
onto him as she was ascending
into Heaven, to give him
a physical proof of what
he had seen.
Thomas' receipt of the
girdle is commonly depicted
in medieval
Renaissance art, where
it is featured as a long string.
According to tradition, the
sacred belt of the Virgin Mary
is a piece of green woolen
fabric, approximately
90 centimeters long, with
little strings at the ends
to tie it up.
Did Thomas actually receive the
sash, or belt, of the Virgin
to offer proof of his story
to the other apostles?
Could such a relic
actually exist?
Is this girdle, or cord,
one of the three cords
of Job's daughters?
Now here is an
extraordinary connection
you won't hear anyone
else but on "Arcanum."
Some shamanistic groups believe
that their sorcerers can
ride rainbows and
ascend to the heavens.
They use red and blue ribbons
to symbolize rainbows.
Here we see the White Tara with
a red ribbon around her neck.
Looking close at
her knees, we see
they are rainbow colored,
signifying the rainbow body.
Some scholars hold that
the red and yellow silk
ribbons that hang on the
frames of the tanka icons
are reflections of
this idea, the ribbon
standing for the rainbow on
which the sorcerers ride.
Tibetan history books hold
that the first generation
of Tibetan kings
descended from the heavens
to the sacred mountains.
In Religions of
Tibet, Giuseppe Tucci
tells how they descended
upon these mountains
from Heaven through
rope-like structures called
the divine cord.
The heavenly rope is closely
connected to the rainbow,
suggesting that these
cords are rainbow-like.
The summit of sacred
mountains were the places
of contact between
Heaven and Earth.
After their time
on Earth was up,
they returned back to
Heaven in a similar fashion.
The Rainbow Bridge
is assessed by beings
who have achieved
their rainbow body.
Is it possible that
the girdle, or belt,
of the ascending
Marys symbolized
the attainment of the light
body, or rainbow body of light?
If so, it explains why, like
the White Tara, Isis and Mary
both wear the red sash.
It is the divine
cord, and a symbol
of the secrets of
resurrection and ascension
that they possess.
>>WILLIAM: I'm William Henry.
Thank you for
watching "Arcanum."
>>CLARE: And I'm Clare Henry.
See you next time.